Update database access docs (#5111)
gravitational/teleport: docs/5.0/preview/database-access.md

## Schedule

> Teleport Database Access is under active development. The alpha release will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport Database Access is under active development. The first version will 
```

include support for PostgreSQL, including Amazon RDS and Aurora.

See [release schedule](./upcoming-releases.md#release-schedule).

## Configure PostgreSQL

> ### On-Prem PostgreSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Self-Hosted PostgreSQL
```

We are using self-hosted vs on-prem. As on-prem can be a limited term vs 'self-hosted' which includes people running PostgreSQL themselves on a cloud provider.

!!! note

>     This section explains how to configure an on-premise instance of PostgreSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This section explains how to configure a self-hosted instance of PostgreSQL
```

>     to work with Teleport Database access. For information about configuring

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    to work with Teleport Database Access. For information about configuring
```
for consistency

    AWS RDS/Aurora see the [section below](#aws-rdsaurora-postgresql).

#### Create Certificate/Key Pair

> Teleport uses mutual TLS authentication so PostgreSQL server must be configured

Reviewer: I would expand this section / introduction. Maybe something like...

> Teleport uses mutual TLS to authentication to access to PostgreSQL instances. The PostgreSQL instance much be configured

> with Teleport's certificate authority and certificate/key pair that Teleport

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with Teleport's certificate authority and a certificate/key pair that Teleport
```

can validate.

To create these secrets, use `tctl auth sign` command. Note that it requires a
running Teleport cluster and [should be run](https://goteleport.com/teleport/docs/architecture/overview/#tctl)
on the auth server.

```sh

> $ tctl auth sign --format=db --host=db.example.com --out=server --ttl=8760h

Reviewer: Added a comment for lazy people not reading below. Do we have any thoughts / recommendations for best practices for shorter lived certs / automation for getting new certs. 

```suggestion
# Export Teleport's certificate authority for host db.example.com with a one year validity period. 
$ tctl auth sign --format=db --host=db.example.com --out=server --ttl=8760h
```

Reviewer: It would be good to expand on our best practices for certificate automation. 

Does Postgres have any best practices for dealing with rotating certs? e.g. Does `postgresql.conf` cache these credentials / What's the process for updating certs on production systems.

Author: I don't think Postgres supports any sort of automation for certificates rotation, so it will likely require database restart.

For now, I've just added a note that it has to be considered when rotating host CA, we might need to expand on this topic more in one of future iterations.

```

Flag descriptions:

* `--format=db`: instructs the command to produce secrets in the format suitable
  for configuring a database server.

> * `--host=db.example.com`: server name to encode in the certificate, should

Reviewer: If using AWS does this also need to map to any AWS RDS name/setting?

Author: No, generating certificates is only required for self-hosted instances. RDS users don't need to do this at all.

authority and `server.crt`/`server.key` with generated certificate/key pair.

#### Configure PostgreSQL Server

To configure PostgreSQL server to accept TLS connections, add the following
to PostgreSQL configuration file `postgresql.conf`:

```conf
ssl = on
ssl_cert_file = '/path/to/server.crt'
ssl_key_file = '/path/to/server.key'
ssl_ca_file = '/path/toa/server.cas'
```

See [Secure TCP/IP Connections with SSL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ssl-tcp.html)
in PostgreSQL documentation for more details.

Additionally, PostgreSQL should be configured to require client certificate
authentication from clients connecting over TLS. This can be done by adding
the following entries to PostgreSQL host-based authentication file `pg_hba.conf`:

```conf
hostssl all             all             ::/0                    cert
hostssl all             all             0.0.0.0/0               cert
```

See [The pg_hba.conf File](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-pg-hba-conf.html)
in PostgreSQL documentation for more details.

### AWS RDS/Aurora PostgreSQL

!!! note
    This section explains how to configure a PostgreSQL-flavored instance of

>     AWS RDS or Aurora database to work with Teleport database access. For

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    AWS RDS or Aurora database to work with Teleport Database Access. For
```
for consistency

>     information about configuring an on-prem PostgreSQL see the [section above](#on-prem-postgresql).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    information about configuring self-hosted PostgreSQL see the [section above](#self-hosted-postgresql).
```

> Teleport Database Access for AWS RDS and Aurora uses IAM authentication which

Reviewer: We should add a note below about how to obtain the ARN for the IAM policy.

Author: Done.

See [Creating a database account using IAM authentication](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/UsingWithRDS.IAMDBAuth.DBAccounts.html)
for more information.

## Configure Teleport

> First, head over to the Teleport [downloads page](https://gravitational.com/teleport/download/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, head over to the Teleport [downloads page](https://goteleport.com/teleport/download/)
```

> Follow the installation [instructions](https://gravitational.com/teleport/docs/installation/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the installation [instructions](installation.md).
```

Start the service:

```sh
$ teleport start -d --config=/path/to/teleport.yaml
```

### Start Database Service with CLI Flags

For a quick try-out, Teleport database service doesn't require a configuration
file and can be launched using a single CLI command:

```sh
$ teleport start -d \
   --roles=database \
   --token=cbdeeab9-6f88-436d-a673-44d14bd86bb7 \
   --auth-server=teleport.example.com:3080 \

>    --db-name=test \

Reviewer: Does this need to match the name in the exported Teleport CA?

Author: No, this is just the service name used for identification purposes and in RBAC labels.

   --db-protocol=postgres \
   --db-uri=db.example.com:5432 \
   --labels=env=test
```

Note that the `--auth-server` flag must point to cluster's proxy endpoint

> because database service always connects back to the cluster over reverse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because database service always connects back to the cluster over a reverse
```

> tunnel framework.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tunnel.
```
b/c implementation detail

Instead of using a static auth token, a short-lived dynamic token can also
be generated for a database service:

```sh
$ tctl tokens add \
    --type=database \
    --db-name=test \
    --db-protocol=postgres \
    --db-uri=db.example.com:5432
```

### Start Database Service with Config File

> Below is the example of a database service configuration file that proxies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a database service configuration file that proxies
```

a single AWS Aurora database:

```yaml
teleport:
  data_dir: /var/lib/teleport-db
  nodename: test
  # Auth token to connect to the auth server.
  auth_token: cbdeeab9-6f88-436d-a673-44d14bd86bb7
  # Proxy address to connect to. Note that it has to be the proxy address
  # because database service always connects to the cluster over reverse
  # tunnel framework.
  auth_servers:
  - teleport.example.com:3080
db_service:
  enabled: "yes"
  # This section contains definitions of all databases proxied by this

>   # service, can contain multiple.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # service, can contain multiple items.
```

  databases:
    # Name of the database proxy instance, used to reference in CLI.
  - name: "aurora"
    # Free-form description of the database proxy instance.
    description: "AWS Aurora instance of PostgreSQL 13.0"
    # Database protocol.
    protocol: "postgres"
    # Database address, example of a AWS Aurora endpoint in this case.
    uri: "postgres-aurora-instance-1.xxx.us-east-1.rds.amazonaws.com:5432"
    # AWS specific configuration, only required for RDS and Aurora.
    aws:
      # Region the database is deployed in.

>       region: us-east-1

Reviewer: Do we really need this extra setting if we already know the location of the database via the uri? 

postgres-aurora-instance-1.xxx.**us-east-1**.rds.amazonaws.com:5432

Author: I thought about this. The thing is, I'm also using this field to tell that this is actually RDS/Aurora instance (to use IAM auth). I guess we could also just try to determine this from the URI as well, but at that point I feel like it would be trying to be too smart and deduce too much which may lead to confusing behaviors (i.e. could you have a different URI for RDS, like a cname? I don't know)... so I usually prefer to be explicit. It is pretty tempting though to get rid of an extra setting.

  cluster_name: "test"
  listen_addr: 0.0.0.0:3025
  tokens:

>   - proxy,node,database:cbdeeab9-6f88-436d-a673-44d14bd86bb7

Reviewer 2: nit: I know it must have been suggested to use token that resembled a real token, but since this needs to be matched in multiple commands and yet be easier to compare/remember when skimming through the docs - how about using something more memorable like `00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000001`?

Author: I think using a real uuid sends a stronger signal to readers that using a secure token is advised.

Start the service:

```sh
$ teleport start -d --config=/path/to/teleport.yaml
```

### Start Database Service with CLI Flags

For a quick try-out, Teleport database service doesn't require a configuration
file and can be launched using a single CLI command:

```sh
$ teleport start -d \
   --roles=database \
   --token=cbdeeab9-6f88-436d-a673-44d14bd86bb7 \
   --auth-server=teleport.example.com:3080 \
   --db-name=test \
   --db-protocol=postgres \
   --db-uri=db.example.com:5432 \
   --labels=env=test
```

Note that the `--auth-server` flag must point to cluster's proxy endpoint
because database service always connects back to the cluster over a reverse
tunnel.

Instead of using a static auth token, a short-lived dynamic token can also
be generated for a database service:

```sh
$ tctl tokens add \
    --type=database \
    --db-name=test \
    --db-protocol=postgres \

>     --db-uri=db.example.com:5432

Reviewer 2: nit: can we use an example output to hint at what a dynamic token could look like?

Author: Not sure it'd add a lot of value to the reader to be honest, outputs also have a tendency to change / become obsolete.

```

### Start Database Service with Config File

Below is an example of a database service configuration file that proxies
a single AWS Aurora database:

```yaml
teleport:
  data_dir: /var/lib/teleport-db
  nodename: test
  # Auth token to connect to the auth server.
  auth_token: cbdeeab9-6f88-436d-a673-44d14bd86bb7
  # Proxy address to connect to. Note that it has to be the proxy address
  # because database service always connects to the cluster over reverse

>   # tunnel framework.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # tunnel.
```

  enabled: "no"
```

!!! tip
    Single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for example

>     multiple database access proxies as well as run other services such as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    multiple database access proxies as well as an SSH service or an application access proxy.
```

an IAM role allowing it to connect to that particular database instance. An
example of such policy is shown in the [AWS RDS/Aurora](#aws-rdsaurora-postgresql)
section above. See [Creating and using an IAM policy for IAM database access](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/UsingWithRDS.IAMDBAuth.IAMPolicy.html)
in AWS documentation.

Teleport database service uses default credential provider chain to find AWS
credentials. See [Specifying Credentials](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/v1/developer-guide/configuring-sdk.html#specifying-credentials)
for more information.

## Connect

Once the database service has joined the cluster, login to see the available
databases:

```sh
$ tsh login --proxy=teleport.example.com:3080
$ tsh db ls
Name   Description Labels
------ ----------- --------
aurora AWS Aurora  env=dev
```

Note that you will only be able to see databases your role has access to. See
[RBAC](#rbac) section for more details.

To connect to a particular database server, first retrieve credentials from
Teleport using `tsh db login` command:

```sh
$ tsh db login aurora
```

!!! tip
    You can be logged into multiple databases simultaneously.

> You can optionally also specify default database name and user to use when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can optionally also specify the database name and the user to use when
```

connecting to the database instance:

```sh
$ tsh db login --db-user=postgres --db-name=postgres aurora
```

When logging into a PostgreSQL database, `tsh` automatically configures a section
in the [connection service file](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-pgservice.html)
with the name of `<cluster-name>-<database-service-name>`.

Suppose the cluster name is "root", then you can connect to the database using
the following `psql` command:

```sh
# Use default database user/name.
$ psql "service=root-aurora"
# Specify database name/user explicitly.
$ psql "service=root-aurora user=alice dbname=metrics"
```

To log out of the database and remove credentials:

```sh
# Log out of a particular database instance.
$ tsh db logout aurora
# Log out of all database instances.
$ tsh db logout
```

## RBAC

Teleport's "role" resource provides the following instruments for restricting

> the database access:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
database access:
```

```yaml
kind: role
version: v3
metadata:
  name: developer
spec:
  allow:
    # Label selectors for database instances this role has access to. These
    # will be matched against the static/dynamic labels set on the database
    # service.
    db_labels:
      environment: ["dev", "stage"]

>     # Database names this role has connect to. Note: this is not the same as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Database names this role will be able to connect to. Note: this is not the same as
```

  enabled: "no"
```

!!! tip

>     Single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for example
>     multiple database access proxies as well as run other services such an
>     SSH service or an application access proxy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    A single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for example
    multiple database access proxies as well as running other services such an
    SSH service or an application access proxy.
```

Start the database service:

```sh
$ teleport start -d --config=/path/to/teleport-db.yaml
```

### AWS Credentials

When setting up Teleport database service with AWS RDS or Aurora, it must have
an IAM role allowing it to connect to that particular database instance. An

> example of such policy is shown in the [AWS RDS/Aurora](#aws-rdsaurora-postgresql)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
example of such a policy is shown in the [AWS RDS/Aurora](#aws-rdsaurora-postgresql)
```

section above. See [Creating and using an IAM policy for IAM database access](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/UsingWithRDS.IAMDBAuth.IAMPolicy.html)
in AWS documentation.

> Teleport database service uses default credential provider chain to find AWS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Teleport database service uses the default credential provider chain to find AWS
```

credentials. See [Specifying Credentials](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/v1/developer-guide/configuring-sdk.html#specifying-credentials)
for more information.

## Connect

Once the database service has joined the cluster, login to see the available
databases:

```sh
$ tsh login --proxy=teleport.example.com:3080
$ tsh db ls
Name   Description Labels
------ ----------- --------
aurora AWS Aurora  env=dev
```

> Note that you will only be able to see databases your role has access to. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note you will only be able to see databases your role has access to. See
```

[RBAC](#rbac) section for more details.

To connect to a particular database server, first retrieve credentials from
Teleport using `tsh db login` command:

```sh
$ tsh db login aurora
```

!!! tip
    You can be logged into multiple databases simultaneously.

> You can optionally also specify the database name and the user to use by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can optionally specify the database name and the user to use by
```

default when connecting to the database instance:

```sh

> $ tsh db login --db-user=postgres --db-name=postgres aurora

Reviewer: Updated to match example. 
```suggestion
$ tsh db login --db-user=postgres --db-name=aurora
```

Author: The current version is correct as it is actually. We're connecting to the database "postgres" within the database server "aurora".

```

When logging into a PostgreSQL database, `tsh` automatically configures a section
in the [connection service file](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-pgservice.html)
with the name of `<cluster-name>-<database-service-name>`.

> Suppose the cluster name is "root", then you can connect to the database using

Reviewer: This is a little confusing. Is this 'root' as in Teleport Root Cluster? Or something else?

Author: In this case "root" is the cluster name.

the following `psql` command:

```sh
# Use default database user/name.
$ psql "service=root-aurora"
# Specify database name/user explicitly.
$ psql "service=root-aurora user=alice dbname=metrics"
```

To log out of the database and remove credentials:

```sh
# Log out of a particular database instance.
$ tsh db logout aurora
# Log out of all database instances.
$ tsh db logout
```

## RBAC

Teleport's "role" resource provides the following instruments for restricting
database access:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v3
metadata:
  name: developer
spec:
  allow:
    # Label selectors for database instances this role has access to. These
    # will be matched against the static/dynamic labels set on the database
    # service.
    db_labels:
      environment: ["dev", "stage"]
    # Database names this role will be able to connect to. Note: this is not
    # the same as the "name" field in "db_service", this is the database names
    # within a particular database instance.
    db_names: ["main", "metrics", "postgres"]
    # Database users this role can connect as.

>     db_users: ["alice", "bob"]

Reviewer: It would be good to add add a deny example, and possibly highlight more advanced features such as wildcards. 

e.g. 

```deny:
      db_name: ["prod*"]

Author: Added below.

```

Similar to other role fields, these support templating variables to allow
propagating information from identity providers:

```yaml
spec:
  allow:

>     db_names: ["{% raw %}{{internal.db_names}}{% endraw %}", "{% raw %}{{external.xxx}}{% endraw %}"]

Reviewer: Side note: We should explain the difference between `{{internal` vs `{{external` does.

Reviewer 3: We do this elsewhere in our RBAC docs, no? We should just link to that section rather than copy/pasting here.

Author: Yeah, there's a link to general RBAC docs right below this.

    db_users: ["{% raw %}{{internal.db_users}}{% endraw %}", "{% raw %}{{external.yyy}}{% endraw %}"]
```

See general [RBAC](../enterprise/ssh-rbac.md) documentation for more details.

## FAQ

### Which database protocols does Teleport Database Access support?

Teleport Database Access Preview supports PostgreSQL protocol. MySQL protocol
support is planned for Teleport 6.0 release, with other databases to follow
over the course of 2021 and beyond.

### Which PostgreSQL protocol features are not supported?

The following PostgreSQL protocol features aren't currently supported:

* [Canceling requests in progress](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/protocol-flow.html#id-1.10.5.7.9).
  Cancel requests issued by the PostgreSQL clients connected to Teleport proxy
  won't be passed to the database server.
* Any of the [authentication methods](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-methods.html)

>   except for the client certificate authentication.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  except for client certificate authentication.
```

    # within a particular database instance.
    db_names: ["main", "metrics", "postgres"]
    # Database users this role can connect as.
    db_users: ["alice", "bob"]
```

It is possible to use wildcards to match any database names/users. For example,
the following role permits access to any database/user within a production
database except for the internal "postgres" database/user:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v3
metadata:
  name: developer
spec:
  allow:
    db_labels:
      environment: ["dev", "prod"]
    db_names: ["*"]
    db_users: ["*"]
  deny:
    db_labels:
      environment: ["dev", "prod"]
    db_names: ["postgres"]
    db_users: ["postgres"]
```

Similar to other role fields, these support templating variables to allow
propagating information from identity providers:

```yaml
spec:
  allow:
    db_names: ["{% raw %}{{internal.db_names}}{% endraw %}", "{% raw %}{{external.xxx}}{% endraw %}"]
    db_users: ["{% raw %}{{internal.db_users}}{% endraw %}", "{% raw %}{{external.yyy}}{% endraw %}"]
```

See general [RBAC](../enterprise/ssh-rbac.md) documentation for more details.

## FAQ

### Which database protocols does Teleport Database Access support?

> Teleport Database Access Preview supports PostgreSQL protocol. MySQL protocol

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Teleport Database Access Preview only supports the PostgreSQL protocol. MySQL protocol
```

Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## RFD

> Please refer to the [RFD document](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0011-database-access.md)

Reviewer 3: We should link to the commit hash in case it gets renamed/moved.

```suggestion
Please refer to the [RFD document](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/024fd582e62560ffc925cd4b4d42c156043c041b/rfd/0011-database-access.md)
```
